docs: Sequencer (#224)
FuelLabs/docs-hub: docs/fuel-101/sequencer.mdx

> # What is a Sequencer?

Author: Donezo

> A sequencer is a component utilized in Layer 2 scaling solutions, such as Optimistic Rollups and certain types of Zero-Knowledge Rollups to order transactions.

Since rollups strategically leverage the consensus and data availability of another layer 1 chain, they depend on a sequencer for transaction ordering.

By efficiently ordering transactions, sequencers allow Layer 2 solutions to significantly reduce transaction processing times and costs. This efficiency gain is essential for scaling blockchain networks and improving their usability for a wider range of applications, making the trade-off an integral part of optimizing blockchain performance.

    <Box.Centered>

>     ![Fuel's Single Sequencer](/images/sequencer.png)

Author: Sure I can remove this for now no problem

---
title: Sequencer
category: Fuel 101
---

# What is a Sequencer?

> A sequencer is a component utilized in Layer 2 scaling solutions, such as Optimistic Rollups and certain types of Zero-Knowledge Rollups to order transactions.

> Since rollups strategically leverage the consensus and data availability of another layer 1 chain, they depend on a sequencer for transaction ordering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since rollups strategically leverage the consensus and data availability of another Layer 1 chain, they depend on a sequencer for transaction ordering.
```

> By efficiently ordering transactions, sequencers allow Layer 2 solutions to significantly reduce transaction processing times and costs. This efficiency gain is essential for scaling blockchain networks and improving their usability for a wider range of applications, making the trade-off an integral part of optimizing blockchain performance.

Reviewer: What's the tradeoff?

Author: I was implying layer 2s not having their own consensus layer and having to leverage Ethereum's. Will remove "making the trade-off an integral part of optimizing blockchain performance." since its obviously a bit confusing.

## Shared Sequencer

> A shared sequencer model involves multiple entities or nodes taking turns or sharing the responsibility of sequencing transactions.

> Fuel leverages a shared sequencer an Application Blockchain Interface (ABCI), integrated with the Cosmos network. Validators are responsible for

Reviewer: I think this sentence needs a touch up from a grammar perspective.

Also, is it true it's integrated with the Cosmos network? I'm not sure that's accurate.

Author: Yes I confirmed this with @DefiCake

Author: Changed to "Fuel leverages a shared sequencer on the Cosmos network. Validators on this network are responsible for..."

1. Establishing the order of Fuel's blocks
2. Verifying these optimistically ordered blocks through fraud proofing

Any misbehaving actors producing bad blocks within the system are penalized (slashed) on Ethereum. The sequencer network uses the `secp256k1` cryptographic algorithm, which is compatible with Ethereum's infrastructure.

### 1. Transaction Batching

> The shared sequencer network to collect a large number of transactions over a certain period. Instead of each transaction being submitted individually to the base chain, the sequencer batches these transactions into a single package. This approach significantly reduces the number of transactions that the base chain has to process, as a single batched transaction on the base chain can represent hundreds or thousands of individual transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The shared sequencer network collects and gathers a large number of transactions over a certain period of time. Instead of each transaction being submitted individually to the base chain, the sequencer batches these transactions into a single package. This approach significantly reduces the number of transactions that the base chain has to process, as a single batched transaction on the base chain can represent hundreds or thousands of individual transactions.
```

### 3. Data Compression

Before submitting transactions to the base chain, sequencers employs various data compression techniques to reduce the size of the transaction data. This involves encoding the data in a more efficient format and uses cryptographic techniques to represent the data more compactly.

### 4. Fraud Proofs

Fuel is an optimistic rollup, meaning its shared sequencer network submits a summary of transactions along with a commitment to the new state. Transactions are presumed valid by default, but there is a [dynamic challenge period](https://forum.fuel.network/t/why-wait-a-week-fast-finality-optimistic-rollups/4471) during which fraudulent transactions can be disputed. This significantly reduces the finality time of transactions from 7 days to just a few blocks. The Merkle root generated can serve as evidence of transaction order for a fraud-proof system. All sequencer network block headers are posted back to Ethereum for transparency and security.

> ## Why Shared Sequencer?

Reviewer: Why Use a Shared Sequencer?

Reviewer: Some other reasons to add:

* Cost efficiency
* Interoperability - it can act as a standardizing agent on how transactions are ordered and processed across l2s
* Scalability of transactions
